Skip to main content
Advertisement
Search
• Explore journals
• Get published
• About BMC
• My account
Search all BMC articles
Search
Environmental Evidence
• Home
• About
• Articles
• Submission Guidelines
Download PDF
• Systematic Review Protocol
• Open Access
• Published: 10 March 2015
A systematic mapping protocol: what are the impacts of different upstream business models in the agriculture and forestry sector on sustainable development in tropical developing countries?
• George Schoneveld1,
• Filipe Di Matteo1,2,
• Frederico Brandao1,2,
• Pablo Pacheco1,
• Idsert Jelsma1,2 &
• Eileen Dyer Jarnholt1,2,3
Environmental Evidence volume 4, Article number: 1 (2015) Cite this article
2288 Accesses
5 Citations
4 Altmetric
Metrics details
Abstract
Background
As a result of rising global food and energy insecurity, investors are increasingly seeking new opportunities in tropical developing countries endowed with comparatively cheap and abundant land resources. Predominantly targeting the agriculture and forestry sectors, these investments could make valuable contributions to the economies of developing countries. However, with most investors opting for plantation-oriented business models, in the context of weak governance regimes within many host countries, many fear that these investments may instead exacerbate socio-economic vulnerabilities and processes of environmental degradation. Therefore, there is a need to explore alternative upstream business models that are more inclusive of the poor and are more aligned with emergent green growth objectives. This systematic map aims to contribute to this debate by cataloging empirical studies conducted on the sustainability of different upstream business models in the agriculture and forestry sector (e.g. involving the cultivation of raw materials). The mapping will offer an overview of the type and quantity of research conducted to date, remaining knowledge gaps, and areas warranting a systematic review.
Methods
Searches will be conducted of both academic and grey literature by employing search strings that have been iteratively tested for comprehensiveness. Studies retrieved in the searches will be screened using pre-defined inclusion criteria and coded across a broad range of study characteristics. Inclusion criteria include, for example, type of business model employed, social, economic, and environmental impacts, and study design (e.g. generation of new empirical evidence). The outputs will be a database of included search results and a systematic map offering descriptive statistics and narrative assessment of the state of the evidence base in this topic.
Background
The confluence of the food and energy crises of the mid 2000s has revealed structural global issues related to long-term food and energy supplies and security [1, 2]. In the context of a rapidly growing global population, changing consumption patterns, finite fossil fuel supplies, and climate change, security of access to natural resources to produce essential goods such as food and energy is becoming an economic imperative [3–5]. Countries with insufficient supplies of natural resources, but with sufficient capital are therefore increasingly encouraged to secure access to these resources beyond national boundaries. As the geographies of supply and demand become more distinct, the private sector is increasingly positioning itself to capitalise on the trade opportunities this creates (e.g. by gaining control over upstream value chain activities). As a result, recent years have witnessed an unprecedented surge in demand for large areas of farmland for the production of food crops and biofuel feedstocks - especially in tropical developing countries, where fertile farmlands are comparatively cheap and abundant.
However, because governments in most major investment destinations are ill equipped or are disinclined to adequately regulate farmland investments, in practice few sufficiently effective checks and balances are placed on land use change to plantation agriculture or forestry [6–8]. Evidence has shown that this could lead to a loss of biodiversity and forest cover [6, 9–11], in turn detracting from the potential contribution of, for example, biofuels to improving the carbon balance. Additionally, as a result of inadequate statutory protection of customary tenure systems, traditional livelihood activities could be displaced without adequate redress, which in turn could adversely impact on the food and income insecurity of vulnerable societal groups [12–14].
These issues raise questions about particularly the social and environmental viability of business models that produce raw material through large-scale plantations. Many of these investments, therefore, fail to adequately address the three pillars of sustainable development, namely economic growth, environmental stewardship, and social inclusion. Many argue that long-term global food and energy security challenges could also be addressed through more smallholder-oriented development pathways [15, 16]. This requires promotion of inclusive business models – seen here as business models that improve the livelihoods of low-income communities by integrating these into value chains as suppliers, employees, distributors, and consumers of goods and services [17]. Within the upstream agricultural and forestry sector, this includes such models as joint ventures, management contracts, and tenant and contract farming schemes [16]. Upstream business models are those business models applied to upstream value chain activities, which in this context involves cultivation of crops. The sustainability of such business models subsequently depends on their long-term economic viability and ability to assimilate green growth strategies (e.g. ‘climate-smart’ and ‘low emission’ agriculture). This topic is particularly relevant in light of global deregulation and liberalization processes that are increasingly relying on commodity markets to address global food and energy supply deficits and private sector investment to achieve poverty alleviation and green growth objectives [18–20].
Important questions, however, remain on the merits and demerits of the different dominant upstream business models. As noted by Kramer and Herrndorf [20], for example, while inclusiveness and green growth are mutually supporting objectives, in practice short-term trade-offs tend to generate tensions between inclusive and green business models. Some also warn that inclusive business models such as outgrower and tenant farming schemes could concentrate production risks with smallholders, engender land conflicts, and promote socio-economic differentiation [21, 22]. Furthermore there are positive examples of industrial plantations, which show that increased access to rural waged labor can contribute to female (economic) empowerment and benefit in particular the poorest, often landless, rural population [23]. In some situations, there are also clear economic advantages to large farms; for example, due to their greater ability to spread risks, adapt to market changes, internalize new innovations, and benefit from economies of scale [2]. Therefore, in order to design appropriate policy interventions and promote a more evidence-based debate, there is an urgent need to systematically evaluate different upstream business models, the conditions under which these can contribute to sustainable development, and the extent to which certain business models consistently outperform others on different sustainability dimensions. This requires an improved understanding of the relationship between context, business models, and social, economic, and environmental outcomes, as conceptualized in Figure 1. Since the rural population is often highly heterogeneous and distribution of impacts uneven, this also requires disaggregation by stakeholder group.
Figure 1
Conceptual framework for reviewing sustainability outcomes of upstream business models.
Full size image
Objective of the review
For this review, we will produce a systematic map, which involves implementing a robust, repeatable, and transparent method for identifying and categorizing literature on broad research questions (such as this) [24]. Like the systematic review, a systematic map uses a comprehensive search strategy and applies clearly stated a-priori criteria for inclusion or exclusion of literature located during the search [25, 26]. It however does not analyse, quantify and compare literature findings as is done in a Systematic Review, but rather describes the nature of the existing evidence base.
This systematic map will identify and categorize empirical studies that have been conducted on the social, economic, and environmental outcomes of upstream business models within the agricultural and forestry sector. It will go on to highlight inter alia the extent to which these studies capture the conditions shaping each outcome, variations in outcomes between stakeholder groups, and differences across business models. Besides creating an overview of the state of the art, the systematic map also serves to identify potential knowledge gaps and specific sub-topics for which available literature warrants a systematic review.
Through a meeting under the project “Large-Scale Investments in Food, Feed, and Energy (LIFFE Options)”, the following research questions were identified to guide the systematic mapping:
Primary research question
What types of sustainability impacts of different upstream business models in the agriculture and forestry sector have been documented in tropical developing countries? Deconstructed in Table 1.
Table 1 Elements of the primary systematic map research question
Full size table
Secondary research questions
To what extent does the literature capture the conditions under which upstream business models impact on sustainable development?
To what extent does the literature disaggregate outcomes by stakeholder group?
To what extent does the literature compare outcomes between upstream business models?
Since the current debate is focused largely on risks and opportunities related to (transboundary) investment flows to developing country agriculture and forestry, this mapping is interested only in ‘business models for investment’. This implies that it intends to catalogue only literature that relates to investments made directly by ‘corporate entities’ into the upstream production of raw materials, which can be private, public, or a combination of both. The entity would need to have a commercial orientation, where the primary objective is profit generation and relying on economies of scale and hired (as opposed to household) labour. However, it will not capture traditional public investments in, for example, input subsidies, extension services, or credit facilities.
Methods
Methods used in the development of the systematic map are adapted from the Collaboration for Environmental Evidence (CEE) systematic review guidelines [24], other systematic map protocols [26–28], and the Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE) systematic mapping guidance [25, 29, 30].
Search terms
The search will, for practical reasons, be conducted in English only. However, search results in other languages will be incorporated into the systematic map, using online translation tools where necessary. Appropriate search terms and strings were tested using ISI Web of Science and Scopus. Searches were developed iteratively, relying on number of search results and the inclusion of reference publications. A short-list of 12 publications providing empirical evidence on a topic relevant to the subject area were used to determine comprehensiveness of the search terms and strings (see Additional file 1 for publication list and results). Since some articles are available in full-text form within some publication databases and some only in abstract form, searches apply only to articles’ title, key words, and abstracts to prevent inconsistencies.
The scoping exercise revealed the complexity of researching broad, multi-disciplinary topics such as these. For example, in relation to the exposure terms, umbrella terms such as ‘business model’ or ‘inclusive business’ are rarely used in the agriculture and forestry sector, there are often numerous synonymous terms (e.g. plantation, commercial farm, agribusiness), or interventions are not consistently labelled or categorized (e.g. tenant farming or management contract). Additionally, some abstracts do not explicitly refer to the sector; instead mentioning only the focal crop or commodity. Similarly, many articles explored very specific outcomes, with many articles not making explicit reference to outcome categories (e.g. ‘social’, ‘economic’, or ‘environmental’). In order to ensure relevant literature is adequately captured, the following adjustments were made to the search string:
The addition of more general exposure terms such as ‘company’, ‘investment’, and ‘corporation’ and prominent investment crops such as ‘oil palm’, ‘sugarcane’, and ‘rubber’ (based on number of hits).
The addition of more specific outcome terms such as ‘deforestation’, ‘degradation’, ‘food security’, and ‘income’. Since it appeared that some articles failed to specify the types of outcomes researched in their abstracts, terms such as ‘impacts’, ‘implications’ and ‘effects’ were also included.
The introduction of topical limiters. Where possible, searches are refined according to their research area; for example, ‘Agriculture’, ‘Environmental Sciences’ and ‘Geography’ are included, while ‘Cell Biology’ and ‘Computer Sciences’ are excluded. The testing revealed large numbers of results from unrelated research domains. The application of topical limiters significantly reduced this number, while continuing to capture the reference literature.
The introduction of geographic limiters. An additional search string is used to confine results to ‘tropical developing countries’. This includes all countries located between the Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn and classified as ‘developing’ by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Although it would have been useful to document literature from other regions also, since almost 25,000 search results were returned in Scopus, the geographic scope needed to be refined in order to obtain a more manageable number of search results. Although the inclusion of these limiters may lead to the exclusion of relevant literature – for example, since some abstracts and keywords neglect to specify their geographic scope – no such cases could be identified through the testing of search strings.
Table 2 provides an overview of the finalized search strings and the number of hits returned by Web of Science and Scopus for the different string combinations and with and without geographic and topical limiters. Additional file 2 provides an overview of the topical and geographic limiters that were applied in the testing of search terms and strings. These limiters will also be applied in the systematic map.
Table 2 Results by search string (performed on 5 May, 2014)
Full size table
Databases
The search will cover the four online search databases listed below. These best represent the research areas relevant to the research questions. All bibliographical details retrieved by the search strategy, including abstracts, will be exported to bibliographical software such as Endnote. Duplicate results will be removed.
AGRIS
CAB Abstracts
ISI Web of Science
Scopus
Internet search engine
Since a large body of research is available as grey literature, the search will also utilize internet search engines. Applying modified search strings if necessary, the first 150 hits from each search engine (sorted by relevance) will be considered.
Dogpile
Google Scholar
Scirus
Other sources of grey literature
Further grey literature searches will be conducted within databases of specialist institutions involved in research on relevant topics. These include:
Center for International Forestry Research
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Food Policy Research Institute
International Institute for Environment and Development
OECD Development Center
World Agroforestry Center
World Bank
World Resources Institute
Search comprehensiveness assessment
A preliminary assessment of the comprehensiveness of the search strategy was conducted during the scoping exercise. The iterative process of adding different search terms and ensuring search strings captured the reference literature appears to have ensured a sufficiently comprehensive search strategy: the final search strings located all of the 12 reference articles used to test search comprehensiveness (Additional file 1). Although this has significantly widened the scope of the search and may lead to the inclusion of large numbers of irrelevant results, it will enhance the probability that most relevant articles are included.
However, there is a risk that some studies are not adequately captured through conventional channels (e.g. conference proceedings, unpublished manuscripts, internal working papers). We will aim to identify these by using our established networks of academics and other stakeholders with expertise in the field and solicit inputs from experts through social media (e.g. Academia, Research Gate, Twitter, and LinkedIn). Dedicated searches will also be conducted to identify appropriate papers hosted on conference websites and academic theses hosted on university repositories.
Study inclusion criteria
In order to warrant inclusion, each paper will have to conform to the following criteria:
Relevant population: Studies should evaluate outcomes of business models on either the environment or on the human population within tropical developing countries.
Relevant intervention/exposure: Studies will focus on one or more business models for investment in the agricultural, biofuel, and forestry sector in tropical developing countries. This will typically include, but may not be limited to, outgrower schemes, tenant farming schemes, nucleus-plasma schemes, farmer-owned businesses, joint ventures, management contracts, and plantations. Logging concessions will be excluded from the analysis since these involve extraction, not production of raw materials. Agricultural business models that do not directly involve corporate entities are not be the object of analysis, though may be used as a comparator.
Relevant outcomes: Studies should evaluate the different business models against measures of ‘sustainability’. This ranges from economic (e.g. productivity and profitability gains) to social (e.g. equity, conflict, and wellbeing) and environmental indicators (e.g. deforestation, degradation, and pollution).
Relevant study design: Studies should offer new empirical evidence, regardless of whether this is quantitative, qualitative, or mixed. Literature reviews, conceptualizations, and opinion pieces are excluded from the review, as are projections and scenario models.
Relevant timeframe: In order to best capture contemporary processes and political and economic realities, studies should relate to interventions in the post-World War II era (1945 – 2014). This will, for example, exclude tenant farming schemes that dominated in feudalist and colonial societies.
Studies will be assessed for inclusion through a multi-tiered process: first, on the basis of title, then by abstract, and finally by full-text review. If insufficient information is available to evaluate whether inclusion is warranted (for example, during the title assessment phase), then it is included for the next phase. Where full-texts are not available, authors will be contacted directly.
The inclusion screening will be conducted by at least two reviewers that each will be responsible for their own set of literature. In order to test the consistency and objectivity of reviewer inclusion decisions, a Kappa analysis will first be conducted on 100 titles and abstracts, as per CEE (2013) guidelines. If a Kappa test returns a value lower than 0.6, reviewers will evaluate differences in the application of inclusion criteria and agree on corrective actions. The test will subsequently be conducted again, until an acceptable score is achieved. Any remaining disagreements over the relevance of articles will be resolved by a third reviewer. Studies read at the full-text stage but subsequently excluded will be recorded in supplementary materials, with the reasons for exclusion noted.
Effect modifiers
Differences in outcomes may be observed due to the differences in research methods, temporal and spatial scales, socio-economic, cultural, environmental, and governance context, crop and sectoral focus, market-orientation, and land tenure systems, all of which will be coded for each study.
Study quality assessment
This systematic map will not present full quality assessment. It will, however, code a number of indicators that will enable assessment of methodological rigor in the included studies, as is further detailed in the data extraction strategy (Table 3).
Table 3 Data extraction and coding schema
Full size table
Data extraction strategy
Data from papers that remain following the inclusion and exclusion exercise will be extracted and coded, as per variables listed in Table 3. Data will be recorded in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. The spreadsheet will be divided into two sets – one will be a shortened version containing data from papers that are not accessible in full-text form and the other will contain data from full-text analysis. Data extraction will be undertaken by at least two reviewers and will involve a Kappa test (using the procedure detailed under ‘study inclusion criteria’).
Data mapping and presentation
The systematic map will contain narrative and descriptive statistics, relating predominantly to quantity of relevant literature, by methods employed, geographic distribution, and types of interventions, outcomes, and populations analyzed. It will highlight the types of processes that shape sustainability outcomes, in line with the Conceptual Framework. It will also explore research gaps and topics warranting further systematic review (if any). A searchable Microsoft Access database of included full-text articles will be made available alongside the map.
References
• 1.
McMichael P: The land grab and corporate food regime restructuring. J Peasant Stud 2012,39(3–4):681–701.
Article  Google Scholar
• 2.
Deininger K, Byerlee D: The rise of large farms in land abundant countries: do they have a future? World Dev 2012,40(4):701–14. 10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.04.030
Article  Google Scholar
• 3.
von Braun J, Meinzen-Dick R Policy Brief. In ‘Land grabbing’ by Foreign Investors in Developing Countries: Risks and Opportunities. Washington DC: International Food Policy Research Institute; 2009.
Google Scholar
• 4.
Zoomers A: Globalisation and the foreignisation of space: seven processes driving the current global land grab. J Peasant Stud 2010,37(2):429–47. 10.1080/03066151003595325
Article  Google Scholar
• 5.
de Schutter O: How not to think of land-grabbing: three critiques of large-scale investments in farmland. J Peasant Stud 2011,38(2):249–79. 10.1080/03066150.2011.559008
Article  Google Scholar
• 6.
Schoneveld GC: The Governance of Large-Scale Farmland Investments in sub-Saharan Africa: A Comparative Analysis of the Challenges for Sustainability. Delft: Eburon Publishers; 2013.
Google Scholar
• 7.
German LA, Schoneveld GC, Mwangi E: Contemporary processes of large-scale land acquisition in Sub-Saharan Africa: legal failures, or elite capture of the rule of law? World Dev 2013, 48:1–18.
Article  Google Scholar
• 8.
Gordon-Maclean A, Laizer J, Harrison P, Shemdoe R: Biofuel Industry Study, Tanzania: An Assessment of the Current Situation. Dar-es-Salaam: World Wide Fund for Nature; 2009.
Google Scholar
• 9.
Nhantumbo I, Salomão A: Biofuels, Land Access and Rural Livelihoods in Mozambique. International Institute for Environment and Development and Centro Terra Viva: London and Maputo; 2010.
Google Scholar
• 10.
Rahmato D: Land to Investors: Large-Scale Land Transfers in Ethiopia. Forum for Social Studies: Addis Ababa; 2011.
Google Scholar
• 11.
Nguiffo S, Schwartz B: Herakles’ 13th Labour? A Study of SGSOC’s Land Concession in South-West Cameroon. Yaoundé: Centre pour L’Environnement et le Developpement; 2012.
Google Scholar
• 12.
Schoneveld GC, German LA, Nukator ED: Land-based investments for rural development? A grounded analysis of the local impacts of biofuel feedstock plantations in Ghana. Ecol Soc 2011,16(4):10.
Google Scholar
• 13.
Tsikata D, Yaro J Paper presented at the International Conference of Global Land Grabbing, 6–8 April 2011. In Land Market Liberalization and Trans-National Commercial Land Deals in Ghana Since the 1990s. Brighton: University of Sussex; 2012.
Google Scholar
• 14.
Shete M: Impact of Large Scale Agricultural Investment on Income and Food Security in Oromiya Region, Ethiopia. In Paper Presented at Presentation at the Annual World Bank Conference On Land And Poverty, April 8–11. Washington DC: World Bank; 2013.
Google Scholar
• 15.
Sulle E, Hall R, Paradza G: Inclusive Business Models in Agriculture? Learning from Smallholder Cane Growers in Mozambique. Policy Brief 66. Brighton: Future Agricultures Consortium; 2014. Dummy Reference list
Google Scholar
• 16.
Vermeulen S, Cotula L: Making the Most of Agricultural Investment: A Survey of Business Models That Provide Opportunities for Smallholders. London: International Institute for Environment and Development; 2010.
Google Scholar
• 17.
WBCSD and SNV: Inclusive Business: Creating Value in Latin America. WBCSD and SNV: Geneva and The Hague; 2011.
Google Scholar
• 18.
Asiedu E: Policy reform and foreign direct investment to Africa: absolute progress but relative decline. Dev Policy Rev 2004,21(1):41–8.
Article  Google Scholar
• 19.
Dupasquier C, Osakwe P: FDI in Africa: Performance, challenges, and responsibilities. J Asian Economies 2005,17(2):241–60.
Article  Google Scholar
• 20.
Herrndorf M, Krämer A: Policy Measures to Support Inclusive and Green Business Models. Geneva: DCED and United Nations; 2012.
Google Scholar
• 21.
Glover D, Kusterer K: Small Farmers, big Business: Contract Farming and Rural Development. London: Macmillan; 1990.
Google Scholar
• 22.
Porter G, Phillips-Howard K: Comparing contracts: an evaluation of contract farming schemes in Africa. World Dev 1997,25(2):227–38. 10.1016/S0305-750X(96)00101-5
Article  Google Scholar
• 23.
Cramer C, Oya C, Sender J: Lifting the blinkers: a new view of power, diversity and poverty in Mozambican rural labour markets. J Mod Afr Stud 2008,46(03):361–92.
Article  Google Scholar
• 24.
Collaboration of Environmental Evidence (CEE): Systematic Review Guidelines Version 4.2. [http://www.environmentalevidence.org/Documents/Guidelines.pdf]
• 25.
Clapton J, Rutter D, Sharif N: SCIE Systematic Mapping Guidance. London: Social Care Institute for Excellence; 2009.
Google Scholar
• 26.
Randall NP, James KL: The effectiveness of integrated farm management, organic farming and agri-environment schemes for conserving biodiversity in temperate Europe - A systematic map. Environ Evid 2012,1(4):1–21.
Google Scholar
• 27.
Haddaway N, Styles D, Pullin AS: Environmental impacts of farm land abandonment in high altitude/mountain regions: a systematic map of the evidence. Environ Evid 2013,2(18):1–18.
Google Scholar
• 28.
Roe D, Sandbrook C, Fancourt M, Schulte B, Munroe R, Sibanda M: A systematic map protocol: which components or attributes of biodiversity affect which dimensions of poverty? Environ Evid 2013,2(1):1–8. 10.1186/2047-2382-2-1
Article  Google Scholar
• 29.
Bates S, Coren E: The Extent and Impact of Parental Mental Health Problems on Families and the Acceptability, Accessibility and Effectiveness of Interventions. London: Social Care Institute for Excellence; 2006.
Google Scholar
• 30.
Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE): SCIE Systematic Mapping Guidance. [http://www.scie.org.uk/publications/researchresources/rr03.pdf]
Download references
Author information
Affiliations
Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), P.O. Box 0113 BOCBD, Bogor, 16000, Indonesia
George Schoneveld, Filipe Di Matteo, Frederico Brandao, Pablo Pacheco, Idsert Jelsma & Eileen Dyer Jarnholt
Department of International Development Studies, Utrecht University (UU), Postbus, 801253508 TC, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Filipe Di Matteo, Frederico Brandao, Idsert Jelsma & Eileen Dyer Jarnholt
Department of Society and Globalization, Roskilde University (RUC), Universitetsvej 1, 4000, Roskilde, Denmark
Eileen Dyer Jarnholt
Authors
• George Schoneveld
View author publications
You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
• Filipe Di Matteo
View author publications
You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
• Frederico Brandao
View author publications
You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
• Pablo Pacheco
View author publications
You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
• Idsert Jelsma
View author publications
You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
• Eileen Dyer Jarnholt
View author publications
You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
Corresponding author
Correspondence to George Schoneveld.
Additional information
Competing interests
There are no potential competing interests. This systematic map is funded by CIFOR through the DFID KNOW-FOR programme.
Authors’ contribution
GS, PP, FM, FB, IJ, and ID conceived the research question. GS tested the search strings and drafted the manuscript. PP, FM, FB, IJ, and ID reviewed and commented on the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Electronic supplementary material
Additional file 1: Reference Literature and Search Results. (DOCX 16 KB)
Additional file 2: Limiters included in search strategy. (DOCX 15 KB)
Rights and permissions
This article is published under license to BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article
Cite this article
Schoneveld, G., Di Matteo, F., Brandao, F. et al. A systematic mapping protocol: what are the impacts of different upstream business models in the agriculture and forestry sector on sustainable development in tropical developing countries?. Environ Evid 4, 1 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1186/2047-2382-4-1
Download citation
Received: 08 May 2014
Accepted: 18 November 2014
Published: 10 March 2015
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/2047-2382-4-1
Keywords
• Agriculture
• Business Models
• Development
• Equity
• Poverty alleviation
• Sustainability
Download PDF
Advertisement
Environmental Evidence
ISSN: 2047-2382
Contact us
• Submission enquiries: Access here and click Contact Us
• General enquiries: info@biomedcentral.com
• Read more on our blogs
• Receive BMC newsletters
• Manage article alerts
• Language editing for authors
• Scientific editing for authors
• Policies
• Accessibility
• Press center
• Support and Contact
• Leave feedback
• Careers
Follow BMC
• BMC Twitter page
• BMC Facebook page
• BMC Weibo page
By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Manage the cookies we use in the preference centre.
© 2020 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.
